Julia 101 Section (#21)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/julia_101.md

# Julia 101 {#sec:julia_101}

> **_NOTE:_**
> In this chapter we will cover the basic of Julia as a programming language.
> Please note that this is not *strictly necessary* for you to use Julia as a tool of data manipulation and data visualization.
> Having a basic understanding of Julia will definitely make you more *effective* and *efficient* in using Julia.
> However, if you prefer to get started straight away, you can jump to [@sec:dataframes] to learn about tabular data with DataFrames.jl.

This is going to be a very brief and *not* in-depth overview of Julia language.
If you are already familiar and confortable with other programming languages, we highly encourage you to read [Julia's documentation](https://docs.julialang.org/).
It is a thoroughly deep dive into Julia.

> It covers all the basics and corner cases, but it can be cumbersome.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It covers all the basics and corner cases, which can be cumbersome.
```

Author: I don't know, which can be cumbersome leaves no room for doubt. One thing implies the other. But leaves some room for doubt. It "could" be...

> Specially if you are a beginner into programming and haven't yet become familiar with opensource software documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Especially, if you are aren't familiar with open-source software documentation.
```

> We'll cover just the basics of Julia.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll cover the basics of Julia.
```

> Since we love analogies, imagine that Julia is a fancy feature-loaded car, such as a brand-new Tesla.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine that Julia is a fancy feature-loaded car, such as a brand-new Tesla.
```

> We'll just explain you how to "drive the car, park it and how to navigate in traffic".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll just explain to you how to "drive the car, park it and how to navigate in traffic".
```

If you want to know what all "buttons in the steering wheel and dashboard do", this is not the resource you are looking for.

## Language Syntax {#sec:syntax}

Julia is a **dynamic-typed language**.
This means that you don't need to compile it before you run code, like you would do in C++ or FORTRAN.
The main differences from Julia to other dynamic languages such as R and Python are the following.

First, Julia, contrary to most dynamic-typed languages, **enables the user to specify type declaration**.

> You already saw some types declarations in the [*Why Julia?*](why_julia.html) section: they are those double colon `::` that suffixes the variables inside `struct`s and `function`'s calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You already saw some types declarations in the [*Why Julia?*](why_julia.html) section: they are those double colon `::` that sometimes comes after variables
```
Counterexample to "`struct`s and `function`'s calls":
```
let x=1
    y::Int = 2
end
```
is valid as are many more situations

> But if you don't want to specify what type are your variables or functions, Julia will gladly deduce it for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But if you don't want to specify what type are your variables or functions, Julia will gladly infer it for you.
```

We also covered multiple dispatch in [*Why Julia?*](julia_accomplish.html) section.
We defined a different type behavior by defining new function signatures for different type's argument while using the same function name.

### Variables {#sec:variable}

Variables are values that you tell the computer to store with an specific name, so that you can later recover or change its value.
Julia have several type of variables but what we most use in Data Science are:

* Integers: `Int64`
* Real Numbers: `Float64`
* Boolean: `Bool`
* Strings: `String`

Integers and real numbers have by default 64 bits, thats why they have the `64` suffix in their type.
If you need more or less precision, there are `Int8` or `Int128` for example.
Most of the time this won't be an issue and can be overwhelming having to deal with different types.

We create new variables by writing the variable name on the left and its value in the right, and in the middle we use the `=` assign operator.
For example:

```jl
scob(
"""
name = "Julia"
age = 9
"""
)
```

Note that the return output of the last statement (`age`) was printed to the console.

> Here we are defining two new variables: `name` and `age`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we are defining two new variables: `name` and `age`.
```

> We can recover its values by typing its name given in the assignment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can recover their values by typing its name given in the assignment:
```

```jl
scob(
"""
name
"""
)
```

If you want to define new values for an existing variable, you can repeat the steps in the assignment.
Note that Julia will now override the previous variable's value with the new one.
Supposed `jl name`'s birthday has passed and now it has turned `jl age+1`:

```jl
scob(
"""
age = 10
"""
)
```

We can do the same with its `name`, suppose that Julia has earned some titles due to its blazing speed.
We would change the variable `name` to the new value:

```jl
scob(
"""
name = "Julia Scientificus Rapidus"
"""
)
```

We can also do operations on variables such as addition or division.
Let's see how much months of age `jl name` has by multiplying `age` by 12:

```jl
scob(
"""
age * 12
"""
)
```

We can inspect variables types by using `typeof()` function:

```{=comment}
Rik: I have no idea why `scob` doesn't work here.
It is overloaded somewhere in the wrong way it seems.
```

```jl
sco("typeof(age)")
```

> The next question the becomes: "What else can I do with `jl typeof(age)`?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next question then becomes: "What else can I do with integers?"
```

There is a nice handy function `methodswith()` that spits out every function available, along with its signature, for a certain type.

> Here I will restrict the output only to the first 5 rows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here I will restrict the output to the first 5 rows:
```

Inside each `struct` there is an optional set of fields.
They differ from the primitive types (e.g. integer and floats) that are by default defined already inside the core of Julia language.
Since most `struct`s are user-defined they are known as user-defined types.

For example lets create a `struct` to represent scientific opensource programming languages.
We'll also define a set of fields along with the corresponding types inside the `struct`:

```jl
sco("""
struct Language
    name::String
    title::String
    year_of_birth::Int64
    fast::Bool
end
"""; post=x -> "")
```

To inspect the field names you can use the `fieldnames()` and passing the desired `struct` as an argument:

```jl
sco("fieldnames(Language)")
```

To use `struct`s, we must instantiate individual instances (or "objects"), each with its own specific values for the fields defined inside the `struct`.
Let's instantiate two instances, one for Julia and one for Python with the appropriate types as fields inside the `Language()` constructor:

```jl
scob(
"""
julia = Language("Julia", "Scientificus Rapidus", 2012, true)

> python = Language("Python", "C/FORTRAN Dependentus Letargicus", 1991, false)

Reviewer: Lethargic can be interpreted as "morbidly sluggish". Although I do not like Python, this is probably a bit too strong.

Maybe,
```suggestion
python = Language("Python", "Guido van Rossum", 1991, false)
```
because "Scientificus Rapidus" and "C/FORTRAN Dependentus Letargicus" are difficult to understand.

Author: I will try to come with something better than. I don't want to mention Guido. He's too passionate about Python and we are making fun of Python and promoting Julia. What if he sues us?

Author: Ok solved. Julia is Rapidus and Python is Letargicus.

"""
)
```

One thing to note with `struct`s is that we cannot change their values once they are instantiated.
We can solve this with a `mutable struct`.

> Also note that everything in Julia that we impose mutability will take a performance hit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, note that mutable objects will, generally, be slower and more error prone.
```
For clarity: I mean error prone because it's easy to update a mutable struct somewhere in one point in the codebase and not notice that it has been updated when looking using it at a completely different part of the codebase.

I say "generally" since there are probably situations where mutable objects are more quick, but I'm not sure

Author: Good Point!

Whenever possible make everything *immutable*.
Let's create a `mutable struct`.

```jl
scob(
"""
mutable struct MutableLanguage
    name::String
    title::String
    year_of_birth::Int64
    fast::Bool
end

julia_mutable = MutableLanguage("Julia", "Scientificus Rapidus", 2012, true)
""")
```

Suppose that we want to change `julia_mutable`'s title.
Now we can do this, since `julia_mutable` is an instantiated `mutable struct`:

```jl
scob(
"""
julia_mutable.title = "Python Obliteratus"

julia_mutable
"""
)
```

### Functions {#sec:function}

Now that we already know how to define variables and custom types as `struct`s, let's turn our attention to **functions**.
In Julia, a function is an **object that maps argument's values to a return value**.
The basic syntax goes something like this:

```julia
function f_name(arg1, arg2)
    stuff_done = stuff with the arg1 and arg2
    return stuff_done
end
```

Every function declaration begins with the keyword `function` followed by the function name.
Then, inside parentheses `()`, we define the arguments separated by a comma `,`.

> Inside the function we specify what we want Julia to do with the parameters we supplied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside the function, we specify what we want Julia to do with the parameters that we supplied.
```

end
"""
)
```

Now it works as expected with any float type:

```jl
scob(
"""
x_32 = Float32(1.1)
round_number(x_32)
"""
)
```

> **_NOTE:_**
> We can inspect types with the `supertypes()` and `subtypes()` functions.

Let's go back to our `Language` `struct` that we defined above.
This is an example of multiple dispatch.
We will extend the `Base.show()` function that prints the output of instantiated types and `struct`s.

By default a `struct` has a basic output, which you saw above in the `python` case.
We can define `Base.show()` function to our `Language` type, so that we have some nice printing for our programming languages instances.
We want to clearly communicate programming languages' names, titles and ages in years of old.
The function `Base.show()` accepts as arguments a `IO` type named `io` followed by the type you want to define custom behaviour:

```jl
sco(
"""
Base.show(io::IO, l::Language) = print(
    io, l.name, " ",
    2021 - l.year_of_birth, ", years old, ",
    "has the following titles: ", l.title
)
"""; post=x -> ""
)
```

Now let's see how `python` will output:

```jl
scob(
"""
python
"""
)
```

#### Multiple Return Values {#sec:function_multiple}

> Sometimes a function can return more than a single return value.

Reviewer: Maybe 
```suggestion
A function can, also, return two or more values.
```
